Spoolman Helper: a usage tracking module and integration for Spoolman, in U1 flavour (#163)
paxx12/SnapmakerU1-Extended-Firmware: docs/spoolman.md

---
title: Spoolman for U1 Multi tool
---

# Spoolman for U1 Multi tool

**Available in: Extended firmware only**

Real time tracking of your material usage

**!!!WARNINIG!!!**

This is not backwards compatible with the manual spoolman config, while the macros may look similar, this integration provides a new klipper module and having both config anabled may cause unforseen behavours.

## Features

This is like your regulat Spoolman for multi tools, with a bit of automation sprinkled in

- Detects and configures RFID tagged spools, utagged spools wil still need to have their filament manually selected
- Set Active spools when a tool is picked

> - Deals with the U1's specific 32 virtual tools system for jobs needing more then 4 filaments

Reviewer: Typo:

```suggestion
- Detects and configures RFID-tagged spools. Untagged spools will still need to have their filament manually selected.
- Set Active spools when a tool is picked.
- Deals with the U1's specific 32 virtual tools system for jobs needing more than 4 filaments.
```

- [docker](https://github.com/Donkie/Spoolman/wiki/Installation#docker-install): the easiets in my opinion
- or you can go nuts with pyton's delirium versions and dependencies and choose a [standalone](https://github.com/Donkie/Spoolman/wiki/Installation#standalone-install) path

### Properly tagged Spools

`Spoolman helper` uses your tags `spool_id` to recognize your spool within your Spoolman instance.
For Snapmaker's spools, since their tags are encripted, it uses the `SKU` property and matches is against the `Article Number` filament property in your Spoolman instance.
Note: half kg and 1kg spools of the same color have different SKU.
Here the SKUs I have, feel free to add more:
![Snapmkaer configured SKUs](images/spoolman/snapmaker_skus.png)
The "SKU trick" can be used with any tag that can be read by your U1 and has such a property.

## Enabling Spoolman

### Connect to your spoolman instance

- Find the `/extended/moonraker/05_spoolman.cfg` file
- uncomment the module configuration section and point it to your spoolman instance.

```
[spoolman]
server: http://10.6.9.248:8000
```

### Enabling the klipper module

- Find the `/extended/klipper/spoolman.cfg` file

> - uncomment the macros include and module configuration section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Find the `/extended/klipper/spoolman.cfg` file.
- Uncomment the macros include and module configuration section.
```

- CLEAR_ACTIVE_SPOOL: clears the current `Active Spool`
- CLEAR_ALL_SPOOLS: clear all the curent selected spool for each tool.
- DUMP_SPOOLS: prints what `Spoolman Helper` knows about the currently loaded spools. This output varies depending on your selected log level.

You will also find 2 other cfg files, they provide the necessary T# macro proxies for the whole spoolman magic to happen:

- `base_tools.cfg`: these are necessary and manadory, without these macros this whole thing does not work.
- `extended_tools.cfg`: these are necessary for `manual` mode, or to provide a fault back spool id for prints needing more than 4 filamens while they're automatically tracked. You most likelly do not need to touch any of this when in `auto` mode.

### Commands

Additionaly `Spoolman Helper` provides the following commands:

- SH_CONFIG, with `MODE` and `LOGS` params, allows you to change the mosumodule's behaviour at runtime without needing to restart klipper or your printer
- SH_DETECT_SPOOLS: tells `Spoolman Helper` to re-detect the loaded spools. This is handy in case of unforseen inconsistent spool states. Kind of like a big reset button for the currently loaded spools

> - SH_DEBUG: prints the current `Spoolman Helper` configuration. It takes an optional `SKU` parameter, if proviede it'll try to match it with `Article Number` and it'll print the spool that would be tracked against the proviede sku

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SH_CONFIG` with `MODE` and `LOGS` params: Allows you to change the module's behaviour at runtime without needing to restart Klipper or your printer.
- SH_DETECT_SPOOLS: tells `Spoolman Helper` to re-detect the loaded spools. This is handy in case of unforeseen inconsistent spool states. Kind of like a big reset button for the currently loaded spools.
- SH_DEBUG: prints the current `Spoolman Helper` configuration. It takes an optional `SKU` parameter; if provided, it'll try to match it with `Article Number`, and it'll print the spool that would be tracked against the provided SKU.
```
